How to set up a Node.js Express server for React (#1917)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: articles/how-to-setup-nodejs-express-for-react/index.md

- A text editor, preferably [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download).
- A web browser, in this case, [Google Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/).
### Setting Up the Folder Structure

![Folder Structure](/engineering-education/how-to-setup-nodejs-express-for-react/folder-structure.PNG)

The first step would be to create a root folder for our case, `demoreactapp`, to hold all of our App's files.  Then we will have the `client` directory that will hold all the React App files. The `node_modules` folder will contain all NPM packages for our `server.js` file. The `node_modules` folder will be auto-generated when we install NPM packages.

Next will be to create a `server.js` file.  The file will contain an Express server that will act as our backend. The `package.json` file is auto-generated when the `npm init -y` command is run in the terminal.

### Creating React App
From the terminal, browse to the root directory using the `cd` command and run the below commands:

```bash
$cd demoreactapp
$npx create-react-app client
```

The above commands will create a react app with the name `client` inside the root directory.

### Setting up the Express Server

> Next will be to create an Express server inside the server.js. Browse to the root directory from the terminal and run the below command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step involves creating an Express server in the file `server.js`. Browse to the root directory from the terminal and run the command mentioned below.
```

```bash
$npm init -y
```

The command will auto-generate the `package.json` file. Next will be to run the below command to install Express and will be saved as a [dependency](https://nodejs.dev/learn/npm-dependencies-and-devdependencies) inside the `package.json`. 

```bash
$npm install express --save
```

Now edit the file `server.js` as below:

```JavaScript
const express = require('express'); //Line 1
const app = express(); //Line 2
const port = process.env.PORT || 5000; //Line 3

// This displays message that the server running and listening to specified port
app.listen(port, () => console.log(`Listening on port ${port}`)); //Line 6

// create a GET route
app.get('/express_backend', (req, res) => { //Line 9
  res.send({ express: 'YOUR EXPRESS BACKEND IS CONNECTED TO REACT' }); //Line 10
}); //Line 11
```

Line 1 and 2 - requires Express and allows us to use it inside our `server.js` file.

Line 3 – It will set the Express server on which port will run on.

Line 6 – will display a message on the console that the server is working as expected.

Line 9 to 11 – It will set a `GET route` that we will, later on, fetch from our client-side React App.

### Setting up the proxy

> In this step, the Webpack development server was auto-generated when we ran the `create-react-app` command.  Our react App is running on the Webpack development server on the frontend.  We can proxy the API requests from the client-side to the API on the server-side. The API  on the server-side(Express server) will be running on port 5000.

Reviewer: Explain webpack development server in short.

state = {
    data: null
  };

  componentDidMount() {
    this.callBackendAPI()
      .then(res => this.setState({ data: res.express }))
      .catch(err => console.log(err));
  }
    // fetching the GET route from the Express server which matches the GET route from server.js
  callBackendAPI = async () => {
    const response = await fetch('/express_backend');
    const body = await response.json();

    if (response.status !== 200) {
      throw Error(body.message) 
    }
    return body;
  };

  render() {
    return (
      <div className="App">
        <header className="App-header">
          <img src={logo} className="App-logo" alt="logo" />
          <h1 className="App-title">Welcome to React</h1>
        </header>
        <p className="App-intro">{this.state.data}</p>
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default App;
```

Inside of `componentDidMount()`, the function `callBackendAPI()` is called. This function will fetch the route previously created in the Express server and then `set{data: null}` to the fetch request-response.
On the line that contains `this.state.data` renders new data  to the [DOM](https://eloquentjavascript.net/14_dom.html)

### Running the App

> First will be to navigate to root directory `demoreactapp` and run the below command:

Reviewer: Rewrite this sentence. We navigate to the root directory `demoreactapp` and run the command below:

```bash
$cd demoreactapp
$node server.js
```

> After running the `server.js`, next will be to browse to “<http://localhost:5000/express_backend>”, and the below message will be displayed:

Reviewer: Mention file before mentioning file name. After running the file server.js

![Get Route success](/engineering-education/how-to-setup-nodejs-express-for-react/get-route-success.PNG)

The above shows that our Express server is working as expected and that the `GET route` we created is working, and it is possible to fetch the route from the client-side. Also, note the URL path is the same as the path we set in our `GET route` in the `server.js` file.

Next, browse to the `client` directory in the terminal, and run the below commands:

```bash
$cd client
$npm start
```

The above commands will run the React Dev server, which runs on port 3000, and automatically open in the web browser.

The screen below with a message will be displayed:

![React app running](/engineering-education/how-to-setup-nodejs-express-for-react/react-app-success.PNG)

> Finally, we have rendered the data fetched from the `GET route` in `server.js` to our frontend React App, as demonstrated above. If the Express server is disconnected, the React server will continue running, but the connectivity to the backend will be lost, and nothing will be displayed.

Reviewer: Last sentence needs to be broken down into 2 simpler sentences.
